Watson Glaser
Test Instructions
This is a full-length practice test that follows the content of the Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal.
Practice test structure:
•	This practice test includes 40 items, to be answered in 30 minutes. 
•	There are 5 sections of this test –
1.	Drawing inferences from facts
2.	Recognition of assumptions 
3.	Deductive reasoning
4.	Logical interpretation
5.	Evaluation of arguments
•	You will receive specific instructions in the beginning of each section.
•	Remember, logical reasoning and critical thinking often differ from everyday reasoning.



1.	Inference Explanation
An inference is a conclusion a person can draw from certain observed or supposed facts. For example, if someone enters a vehicle and turns the lights on, one might infer that this person is about to drive. However, this inference may be true or false. It is possible that the person just wanted to verify that the lights are working.
In this section, each exercise begins with a statement of facts that you are to regard as true. After each statement of facts you will find several possible inferences - that is, conclusions that some persons might draw from the stated facts. You are to examine each inference separately, and to make a decision as to its degree of truth or falsity.

The degree of truth or falsity is rated on a 5-item scale, according to your apprehension:
True - The inference is true and properly follows beyond a reasonable doubt from the statement of facts given.
Probably True - In the light of facts given, it is more likely that the inference is true than false.
Insufficient Data - The given facts do not provide sufficient information and a basis for judging to tell whether the inference is likely to be true or false.
Probably False - In light of the given facts, it is more likely that the inference is false than true.
False – The statement is definitely false. It is wrong, either because it misinterprets the facts given, or because it contradicts the facts or necessary inferences from those facts.

Sometimes, in deciding whether an inference is probably true or probably false, you will have to use certain commonly accepted knowledge or information that practically every person holds. Do not hesitate to use such knowledge, but on the other hand – never rely on such knowledge as the sole basis for judging an inference to be True or False. These rulings must be supported by the statement of facts given.

● adapted from the Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal test instructions

2.	Assumption Explanation
An assumption is something presupposed or taken for granted. When you say, “I’m flying to Italy in the summer”, you take for granted or assume that you will have physical ability and availability to fly in the summer, that it is possible to catch a flight to Italy, and more.

The next section is comprised of several statements. Each statement is followed by several proposed assumptions. You are to decide for each assumption whether a person, in stating the given statement, is really making that assumption – that is, taking it for granted, justifiably or not. Notice that these assumptions do not have to concur with reality or reason – you are not judging their common sense, but plainly whether they are made or not.

If you think that the given assumption is taken for granted in the statement, mark the option
Assumption Made. If you think the assumption is not necessarily taken for granted in the statement, mark the option Assumption Not Made. Remember to judge each assumption independently.



● adapted from the Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal test instructions

Important: You have almost four minutes (225 seconds) to complete five questions. when the time runs out, you will automatically be moved to the next section, even if you did not answer all five questions.
3.	Deduction 
In this section, each exercise consists of several statements (premises) followed by several suggested conclusions. For the purposes of this test, consider the statements in each exercise to be true without exception. (e.g. the sentence "apples are tasty", should be read as all apples are actually tasty, even rotten apples and unripe apples).

Read the first conclusion beneath each statement. If you think it necessarily follows from the statements given, mark the option Conclusion Follows. If you think it is not a necessary conclusion from the statements given, or that the conclusion does not concur with the premises, mark the option Conclusion Does Not Follow. 

Important note: While making a decision, you should rely only on the premises, even though you may believe some conclusions may or may not be true according to your general knowledge. Try not to let your prejudices influence your judgment - just stick to the given statements (premises) and judge each conclusion as to whether it necessarily follows from the premise or not.

If this is the first time you encounter this type of questions, we advise you to read JobTestPrep's Introduction to Formal Logic, and only then start practicing. 



● adapted from the Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal test instructions

4.	Interpretation Explanation
In this section, each exercise consists of a short paragraph followed by several suggested conclusions. For the purpose of this test, assume that everything in the short paragraph is true. Your goal is to judge whether or not each of the proposed conclusions logically follows beyond a reasonable doubt from the information given in the paragraph.
If you think that the proposed conclusion follows beyond a reasonable doubt (even though it may not follow absolutely and necessarily), mark the option Conclusion Follows. If you think that the conclusion does not follow beyond a reasonable doubt from the facts given, mark the option Conclusion Does Not Follow. Remember to judge each conclusion independently.



● adapted from the Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal test instructions

Important: You have almost four minutes (225 seconds) to complete five questions. when the time runs out, you will automatically be moved to the next section, even if you did not answer all five questions.

5.	Evaluation of Arguments
In making decisions about important questions, it is desirable to be able to distinguish between arguments that are strong and arguments that are weak, as far as the question at issue is concerned.
For an argument to be strong, it must be both important and directly related to the question.
An argument is weak if it is not directly related to the question (even though it may be of great general importance), or if it is of minor importance, or if it is related only to trivial aspects of the question.
In this section you'll be presented with a series of questions. Each question will be followed by several arguments. For the purpose of this test, you are to regard each argument as true. Your task is to decide for each argument whether it is a strong or a weak argument.
Judge each argument separately on its own merit, and mark the corresponding option.

Important Note - Try not to let your personal attitude toward the question influence your evaluation of the argument, since each argument is to be regarded as true. Judge each argument only in the face of the above mentioned criteria – direct relation, importance, triviality.
    

● adapted from the Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal test instructions
 

